---
layout: post
title: Passing the Torch
book: Deuteronomy
chapter: 31
verse: '1-8'
---
## Men's Bible Study: Moses' Charge to Joshua

[{{page.book}} {{page.chapter}}:{{page.verse}}](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search={{page.book}}+{{page.chapter}}%3A{{page.verse}}&version=NIV)
### About the book of {{page.book}}:
Deuteronomy and the four books that precede it are known as the Pentateuch, written by Moses around 1500 B.C.
Moses has been traditionally recognized as the author of Deuteronomy, since the book itself testifies that Moses wrote it. 
Both the Old and New Testaments support the claim of Mosaic authorship. 
While Deuteronomy 32:48–34:12 was added after Moses’ death (probably by Joshua), the rest of the book came from Moses’ hand just before his death in 1405 B.C.
Deuteronomy is a historical book by nature, written for an ancient Hebrew audience.

### Background:
Deuteronomy records the events at the end of Moses' life. Through Moses, God had led Israel out of Egypt and
because of their disobedience, Israel had spent 40 years in the desert before going into the promised land.
Moses is now 120 years old. Reaching the end of his life and having been forbidden to enter the 
Canaan himself. Moses now commissions Joshua as his successor and charges him to lead Israel
into the promised land.

> 1 Then Moses went out and spoke these words to all Israel: 2 "I am now a hundred and twenty years old and I am no longer able to lead you. The LORD has said to me, 'You shall not cross the Jordan.' 3 The LORD your God himself will cross over ahead of you. He will destroy these nations before you, and you will take possession of their land. Joshua also will cross over ahead of you, as the LORD said. 4 And the LORD will do to them what he did to Sihon and Og, the kings of the Amorites, whom he destroyed along with their land. 5 The LORD will deliver them to you, and you must do to them all that I have commanded you. 6 Be strong and courageous. Do not be afraid or terrified because of them, for the LORD your God goes with you; he will never leave you nor forsake you." 7 Then Moses summoned Joshua and said to him in the presence of all Israel, "Be strong and courageous, for you must go with this people into the land that the LORD swore to their ancestors to give them, and you must divide it among them as their inheritance. 8 The LORD himself goes before you and will be with you; he will never leave you nor forsake you. Do not be afraid; do not be discouraged."
> 
> [Deuteronomy 31:1-8 NIV]

### For Discussion:
1. Can you recall a time in your life when you had to take on a big responsibility on your own for the first time? 
   1. What was it like? What do you recall? 
   2. How did it turn out? 
   3. What helped?
2. How does this passage relate to your life at home? At work? At church? 
3. Moses transfers leadership to Joshua. As men, we are called by God to be leaders and we are almost always looked to 
for leadership. What qualities or characteristics should a man possess when entrusted with leadership responsibilities? 
4. How can we as men mentor and prepare the next generation to take on leadership roles in various aspects of life, 
such as family, work, or community?
5. Share examples of times when someone encouraged you to be strong in your faith or actions.
6. How does this passage point to Jesus and our need for salvation?
