---
layout: post
title: Courage Under Fire
book: Daniel
chapter: 3
verse: '1-30' 
---
## Men's Bible Study: Courage Under Fire


### About the book of Daniel:
The book of Daniel is one of five books in the Old Testament referred to as the Major Prophets. These books are Isaiah, Jeremiah, Lamentations Ezekiel and Daniel. This is in contrast to the 12 books known as the Minor Prophets. The terms major and minor don't refer to the significance of prophets themselves, but rather the books. The prophet Daniel is credited as the author of the book that bears his name. The book of Daniel is both prophetic and historical, chronicling the people, and events surrounding the capture and exile of Israel by the Babylonians in 605 B.C. and later the Medo-Persians in 539 B.C.

### Background:
Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah were around 15 years of age when they and numerous other young men who descended from Israel's nobility were carried off to Babylon following the conquest of Jerusalem. They were renamed Belteshazzar, Shadrach, Mesach, and Abednego and immersed in a culture that worshiped false gods, men, decadence and pleasure. They remained disciplined and faithful to God throughout their lives. God granted them favor, and they rose to prominence in the Babylonian and Medo-Persian governments. Their integrity and wisdom earned them the respect and sometimes ire of their contemporaries.
King Nebuchadnezzar II, also known as Nebuchadnezzar the Great, reigned over the Neo-Babylonian Empire from 605 BC to 562 BC.

> 1 King Nebuchadnezzar made an image of gold, sixty cubits high and six cubits wide, and set it up on the plain of Dura in the province of Babylon. 2 He then summoned the satraps, prefects, governors, advisers, treasurers, judges, magistrates and all the other provincial officials to come to the dedication of the image he had set up. 3 So the satraps, prefects, governors, advisers, treasurers, judges, magistrates and all the other provincial officials assembled for the dedication of the image that King Nebuchadnezzar had set up, and they stood before it. 4 Then the herald loudly proclaimed, "Nations and peoples of every language, this is what you are commanded to do: 5 As soon as you hear the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipe and all kinds of music, you must fall down and worship the image of gold that King Nebuchadnezzar has set up. 6 Whoever does not fall down and worship will immediately be thrown into a blazing furnace." 7 Therefore, as soon as they heard the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp and all kinds of music, all the nations and peoples of every language fell down and worshiped the image of gold that King Nebuchadnezzar had set up. 8 At this time some astrologers came forward and denounced the Jews. 9 They said to King Nebuchadnezzar, "May the king live forever! 10 Your Majesty has issued a decree that everyone who hears the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipe and all kinds of music must fall down and worship the image of gold, 11 and that whoever does not fall down and worship will be thrown into a blazing furnace. 12 But there are some Jews whom you have set over the affairs of the province of Babylon--Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego--who pay no attention to you, Your Majesty. They neither serve your gods nor worship the image of gold you have set up." 13 Furious with rage, Nebuchadnezzar summoned Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego. So these men were brought before the king, 14 and Nebuchadnezzar said to them, "Is it true, Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, that you do not serve my gods or worship the image of gold I have set up? 15 Now when you hear the sound of the horn, flute, zither, lyre, harp, pipe and all kinds of music, if you are ready to fall down and worship the image I made, very good. But if you do not worship it, you will be thrown immediately into a blazing furnace. Then what god will be able to rescue you from my hand?" 16 Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego replied to him, "King Nebuchadnezzar, we do not need to defend ourselves before you in this matter. 17 If we are thrown into the blazing furnace, the God we serve is able to deliver us from it, and he will deliver us from Your Majesty's hand. 18 But even if he does not, we want you to know, Your Majesty, that we will not serve your gods or worship the image of gold you have set up." 19 Then Nebuchadnezzar was furious with Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, and his attitude toward them changed. He ordered the furnace heated seven times hotter than usual 20 and commanded some of the strongest soldiers in his army to tie up Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego and throw them into the blazing furnace. 21 So these men, wearing their robes, trousers, turbans and other clothes, were bound and thrown into the blazing furnace. 22 The king's command was so urgent and the furnace so hot that the flames of the fire killed the soldiers who took up Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, 23 and these three men, firmly tied, fell into the blazing furnace. 24 Then King Nebuchadnezzar leaped to his feet in amazement and asked his advisers, "Weren't there three men that we tied up and threw into the fire?" They replied, "Certainly, Your Majesty." 25 He said, "Look! I see four men walking around in the fire, unbound and unharmed, and the fourth looks like a son of the gods." 26 Nebuchadnezzar then approached the opening of the blazing furnace and shouted, "Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, servants of the Most High God, come out! Come here!" So Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego came out of the fire, 27 and the satraps, prefects, governors and royal advisers crowded around them. They saw that the fire had not harmed their bodies, nor was a hair of their heads singed; their robes were not scorched, and there was no smell of fire on them. 28 Then Nebuchadnezzar said, "Praise be to the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, who has sent his angel and rescued his servants! They trusted in him and defied the king's command and were willing to give up their lives rather than serve or worship any god except their own God. 29 Therefore I decree that the people of any nation or language who say anything against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego be cut into pieces and their houses be turned into piles of rubble, for no other god can save in this way." 30 Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego in the province of Babylon. 
> Daniel 3:1-30 NIV

### For Discussion:
1. The book of Daniel is both historical and prophetic. What parallels do you observe in what's recorded and what's happening today? 
2. Shadrach, Mesach and Abednego were appointed administrators over the province of Babylon in Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom. He knew they were Jews and served the God of Israel.
What could explain his sudden turn against them and his extreme anger towards them?
3. What do you make of their "*even if*" statement in verse 18? 
4. As men, we are called by God to be leaders, and we are almost always looked to 
for leadership. What qualities or characteristics do we see in them that we should strive to emulate?
5. What do we observe in Scripture that could explain their courage to stand against king and culture?
6. How can we as men be prepared to stand firm for Christ when the time comes for us to do so as leaders of our family, work, or community? 
7. How does this passage point to the Gospel of Jesus Christ?
