---
layout: post
title: Sola Fide?
---
## Men's Bible Study: Justified by Faith alone?

### Overview
What makes a man right with God? Is our good standing with God, because He sees the potential
 in us? Does He save us because of the good things we do? Does He save us expecting us to 
perform? What if we slip up? What is our salvation conditional upon, if anything?

A fundamental teaching of the Protestant church says our 
justification before God is attained solely through faith in Jesus Christ.
This doctrine asserts that our salvation is a gift of grace, and it is received by 
faith, not works. It asserts also that this faith transforms us, causing us to
naturally lead a life of good works in response to God's grace.

This doctrine is known as "Sola Fide." It's Latin meaning is "by faith
alone." Meaning, justification (being declared righteous before God) is received by 
faith alone, without the need for good works or adherence to the Law.

> 8 For it is by grace you have been saved, through faith--and this is not from yourselves, it is the gift of God-- 9 not by works, so that no one can boast. 10 For we are God's handiwork, created in Christ Jesus to do good works, which God prepared in advance for us to do. - Ephesians 2:8-10 NIV

> 22 This righteousness is given through faith in Jesus Christ to all who believe. There is no difference between Jew and Gentile, 23 for all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God, 24 and all are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that came by Christ Jesus. 25 God presented Christ as a sacrifice of atonement, through the shedding of his blood--to be received by faith. He did this to demonstrate his righteousness, because in his forbearance he had left the sins committed beforehand unpunished-- 26 he did it to demonstrate his righteousness at the present time, so as to be just and the one who justifies those who have faith in Jesus. 27 Where, then, is boasting? It is excluded. Because of what law? The law that requires works? No, because of the law that requires faith. 28 For we maintain that a person is justified by faith apart from the works of the law. - Romans 3:22-28 NIV

> 15 "We who are Jews by birth and not sinful Gentiles 16 know that a person is not justified by the works of the law, but by faith in Jesus Christ. So we, too, have put our faith in Christ Jesus that we may be justified by faith in Christ and not by the works of the law, because by the works of the law no one will be justified. 
> 17 "But if, in seeking to be justified in Christ, we Jews find ourselves also among the sinners, doesn't that mean that Christ promotes sin? Absolutely not! 18 If I rebuild what I destroyed, then I really would be a lawbreaker. 19 "For through the law I died to the law so that I might live for God. 
> 20 I have been crucified with Christ and I no longer live, but Christ lives in me. The life I now live in the body, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me. 21 I do not set aside the grace of God, for if righteousness could be gained through the law, Christ died for nothing!" - Galatians 2:15-21 NIV

> 7 But whatever were gains to me I now consider loss for the sake of Christ. 8 What is more, I consider everything a loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord, for whose sake I have lost all things. I consider them garbage, that I may gain Christ 9 and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which is through faith in Christ--the righteousness that comes from God on the basis of faith. - Philippians 3:7-9 NIV

These verses are just a few examples of how the Apostle Paul understood and taught
the early church about the nature and source of our salvation.

### But Wait...
Didn't Jesus own brother say, "...a person is considered righteous by what they do and not by faith alone?"
> 14 What good is it, my brothers and sisters, if someone claims to have faith but has no deeds? Can such faith save them? 15 Suppose a brother or a sister is without clothes and daily food. 16 If one of you says to them, "Go in peace; keep warm and well fed," but does nothing about their physical needs, what good is it? 17 In the same way, faith by itself, if it is not accompanied by action, is dead. 18 But someone will say, "You have faith; I have deeds." Show me your faith without deeds, and I will show you my faith by my deeds. 19 You believe that there is one God. Good! Even the demons believe that--and shudder. 20 You foolish person, do you want evidence that faith without deeds is useless? 21 Was not our father Abraham considered righteous for what he did when he offered his son Isaac on the altar? 22 You see that his faith and his actions were working together, and his faith was made complete by what he did. 23 And the scripture was fulfilled that says, "Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness," and he was called God's friend. 24 You see that a person is considered righteous by what they do and not by faith alone. 25 In the same way, was not even Rahab the prostitute considered righteous for what she did when she gave lodging to the spies and sent them off in a different direction? 26 As the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without deeds is dead. - James 2:14-26 NIV

And didn't Jesus Himself say you also have to do stuff to get into heaven?
> 21 "Not everyone who says to me, 'Lord, Lord,' will enter the kingdom of heaven, but only the one who does the will of my Father who is in heaven. 22 Many will say to me on that day, 'Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name and in your name drive out demons and in your name perform many miracles?' 23 Then I will tell them plainly, 'I never knew you. Away from me, you evildoers!' - Matthew 7:21-23 NIV

Didn't Paul say we're supposed to "work out our own salvation?"
> 12 Therefore, my dear friends, as you have always obeyed--not only in my presence, but now much more in my absence--continue to work out your salvation with fear and trembling, - Philippians 2:12 NIV

### For Discussion:
* What do we need to apply to our study of these passages in order to reconcile these apparent contradictions?
* What other passages come to mind on the subject of faith, works and salvation?
* What does James 2 tell us about the relationship between faith, works and salvation?
* How does a salvation that depends our good behavior affect the sufficiency of Christ's atoning sacrifice?
* When taken in full context, do you find these passages to affirm or disprove the concept of justification by faith in Christ alone?

