---
layout: post
title: Anger and the Godly Man
---
## Men's Bible Study: Anger and the Godly Man

### Is there a place for anger in the life of a Godly man?
Anger is one of the most powerfully emotions a man can experience.
It often takes us by surprise, and when it does, it hijacks our 
ability to reason. If given the opportunity, it will cause irreparable
physical, emotional and spiritual damage to us and those around us. 
Horrible things have been done in moments of anger. But is anger always 
bad? What does God have to say about it in His Word? Is there such a thing
as "righteous anger?"

In the New Testament, there are two Greek words that are translated
into English as "anger". 

Less commonly we see "_parorgizō_" which tranlates to "anger, provoke to wrath"

>19 Again I ask: Did Israel not understand? First, Moses says, "I will make you envious by those who are not a nation; I will make you ***angry*** by a nation that has no understanding." - Romans 10:19 NIV

>4 Fathers, do not ***exasperate*** your children; instead, bring them up in the training and instruction of the Lord. - Ephesians 6:4 NIV

More frequently we see forms of the root word "_orgē_" which translates to "wrath, anger, vengeance, indignation"

>26 "In your anger do not sin": Do not let the sun go down while you are still angry,  - Ephesians 4:26 NIV  

>31 Get rid of all bitterness, rage and anger, brawling and slander, along with every form of malice. - Ephesians 4:31 NIV  

>8 But now you must also rid yourselves of all such things as these: anger, rage, malice, slander, and filthy language from your lips. - Colossians 3:8 NIV  

> 8 Therefore I want the men everywhere to pray, lifting up holy hands without anger or disputing. - 1 Timothy 2:8 NIV  

>19 My dear brothers and sisters, take note of this: Everyone should be quick to listen, slow to speak and slow to become angry,
20 because human anger does not produce the righteousness that God desires. - James 1:19-20 NIV

But isn't God capable of anger?
> 10 That is why I was angry with that generation; I said, 'Their hearts are always going astray, and they have not known my ways.' 11 So I declared on oath in my anger, 'They shall never enter my rest.' " - Hebrews 3:10-11 NIV

>14 Then the LORD's anger burned against Moses and he said, "What about your brother, Aaron the Levite? I know he can speak well. He is already on his way to meet you, and he will be glad to see you. - Exodus 4:14 NIV

> 7 The LORD's anger burned against Uzzah because of his irreverent act; therefore God struck him down, and he died there beside the ark of God. - 2 Samuel 6:7 NIV

What about when Jesus...
>14 In the temple courts he found people selling cattle, sheep and doves, and others sitting at tables exchanging money. 15 So he made a whip out of cords, and drove all from the temple courts, both sheep and cattle; he scattered the coins of the money changers and overturned their tables. 16 To those who sold doves he said, "Get these out of here! Stop turning my Father's house into a market!" 17 His disciples remembered that it is written: "Zeal for your house will consume me." - John 2:14-17 NIV

> 4 Then Jesus asked them, "Which is lawful on the Sabbath: to do good or to do evil, to save life or to kill?" But they remained silent. 5 He looked around at them in anger and, deeply distressed at their stubborn hearts, said to the man, "Stretch out your hand." He stretched it out, and his hand was completely restored. - Mark 3:4-5 NIV

...and David
>23 As he was talking with them, Goliath, the Philistine champion from Gath, stepped out from his lines and shouted his usual defiance, and David heard it. ... 26 David asked the men standing near him, "What will be done for the man who kills this Philistine and removes this disgrace from Israel? Who is this uncircumcised Philistine that he should defy the armies of the living God?" - 1 Samuel 17:23, 26 NIV   

...and Nehemiah
> 6 When I heard their outcry and these charges, I was very angry. 7 I pondered them in my mind and then accused the nobles and officials. I told them, "You are charging your own people interest!" So I called together a large meeting to deal with them 8 and said: "As far as possible, we have bought back our fellow Jews who were sold to the Gentiles. Now you are selling your own people, only for them to be sold back to us!" They kept quiet, because they could find nothing to say. 9 So I continued, "What you are doing is not right. Shouldn't you walk in the fear of our God to avoid the reproach of our Gentile enemies? - Nehemiah 5:6-9 NIV

### For Discussion:
* What are we learning from the Scriptures about anger?
* What is the relationship between anger and wrath?
* Is there a time and place for anger? 
* When is it wrong and when might it be right? What makes the difference?
* What is it you need to submit unto God so that you can keep anger in its place?